You now know how to extract data from inside a model using output hidden states and also using hooks.
The purpose of this video is to show you the relationship between them, and it's also going to be a
great reminder that the function of a transformer block is to take an existing embeddings vector that
comes into that block, calculate, and then add on some adjustment factor, and then pass along that
transformer or that embeddings vector onto the next layer.
So after creating and implanting hooks into the attention and MLP subparts of a transformer block,
I will spend most of the time in the Python demo showing how you can perfectly reconstruct the output
from layer 11 using the output from layer ten plus the transformer modulations.
So from the modulation from attention and from the MLP layer.
So for example in this top left scatter plot over here you can see the activations that are the output
of layer ten.
So that are that's the inputs into layer 11.
And here you can see on the y axis the outputs of layer 11.
So this is basically the transformation that the embeddings go through from the 10th transformer block
to the 11th transformer block.
You can see that these are strongly correlated because it's actually the same token.
It's just going through one transformer layer.
Okay.
And over here with the green dots here you see the adjustment from the attention subblock and the adjustment
from the MLP Subblock.
So this is the output of the attention layer.
And this is the output of the MLP layer inside the transformer.
They are sort of kind of weakly correlated, but they're not really that strongly correlated.
Now remember that with these internal calculations inside the transformer block, the goal here is not
to generate completely new vectors.
Instead, what these transformer subblocks do is calculate an adjustment to make for each token embedding
vector that is based on the preceding context of the other tokens that came before each token, and
on like world knowledge that the model has developed based on pre-training and fine tuning.
Now when you add the change in attention, plus the change in MLP onto the output of layer ten, that's
what you see on the x axis here.
Then you get exactly the output of layer 11.
And then finally over here you can see the difference of the activations between layers ten and 11.
And here is the sum of the two.
I call these attention deltas, but it's the attention plus the MLP.
So the two parts inside the transformer block.
And those are also perfectly reconstructing each other.
Now on the one hand, these results are not really that surprising considering what you know about how
the transformer block works.
But I think these results are nice to see and still quite insightful and thought provoking.
And looking through the code, I think, will help you really understand how to create and work with
hooks, and also how to interpret and work with the hidden states that you get from the models.
All right, let's switch to code.
Here I am importing some libraries.
Here I'm importing the GPT two To model.
Now notice what I am not doing here, which is switching the model into eval mode.
So I'm leaving the model in the regular training mode, which means that all of the gradient information
will be calculated.
All the gradient related computational graphs are going to be active, and that's fine.
Uh, typically.
So of course we're not doing any training in this video.
Typically you would want to switch the model into eval mode.
However I'm intentionally leaving it out of eval mode because that will allow me to show you a couple
of additional details about implanting hooks.
Uh, depending on whether the model is in eval mode or not.
Okay.
So now it's loading.
Here I'm printing out the model architecture as a little reminder, just so we can see where these hooks
are actually going into.
So this is uh, this looks very similar to the hooks you saw in the previous video.
When we needed to extract really just the cue activations, we needed a little bit of additional code
to process the data and push the data through the cue weights before running through all of the attention
mechanisms.
In this video for this demo, I don't actually want to get the pre attention cue values.
I want to get the final output of the attention Subblock.
And so that's what I do here.
So we can just get the output.
Uh here this is for attention.
And this is the output from the MLP layer.
And I'm doing this from layer uh ten.
Okay.
And then here I have the here's where I'm actually implanting the hook.
So I have this function register forward hook.
And we can see that I'm implanting this in one of the attention blocks in attention or MLP.
And both cases it is the matrix or the part c underscore proj.
So let's see where in the matrix where in the uh the model C proj is.
So that is here.
Let me zoom in a little bit.
Okay.
So here for each of the transformer blocks we have the attention part.
And then we have the MLP part and the C proj.
That's the output projection.
So this is the final part of the attention sub block.
And the output of C proj is the input into the MLP layer where we would start with layernorm and so
on.
And furthermore the C proj here this is the output of the MLP layer and that becomes the input into
the next transformer block.
Okay.
So with that in mind uh let's see.
So now uh, so yeah, so here we are implanting the two hooks for attention and MLP in one transformer
block.
What I wanted to show you was this, uh, method here.
So detach.
Uh, you know what this does?
This removes all of the numbers inside this matrix, this PyTorch tensor from any of the gradient information
and computational graph.
Now, when the model is in training mode, then attached to every tensor is some gradient information
about the gradients, its norms, all sorts of links to different items in the computational graph.
And so when we want to analyze the data, for example, in mech interp analyses, we want to decouple
that.
We just want the numbers.
We don't want the gradient information.
So that's why we use detach.
Now when the model is switched into eval mode, which I've not done here, I typically do it, uh,
it's generally a good idea if you're not training the model.
I did it in the previous video.
I'm not doing it here.
Then when the model is eval in eval mode, you do not need this detach method here.
Okay.
So that was one thing I wanted to demonstrate there.
So let's see uh, run that cell and now I can, uh.
Yeah.
So this implants the hooks.
Uh oh.
Another thing I wanted to mention is that here I am not requesting any output from this method here.
And what does that mean?
That means that without an output, I don't have a handle to this hook.
And that means that I cannot actually remove that hook from the model because I have no residual variable
pointer to, uh, to tell Python where that hook actually is.
Now, in this case, that's completely fine.
You can see this is not a very long code file.
I do not need to remove this hook.
Uh, but if you want to remove the hook, then you need to have, you know, some kind of a handle out
here to be able to remove it.
Okay.
Uh.
Let's see.
So now I'm going to, uh, just push a bit of text through this model here, and I want to request the
hidden states, and.
Yeah, this gives me a forward pass.
Now, you know that inside this outputs variable, there is an attribute here called hidden states from
this being set to true.
So that means now we have the hidden states from the model.
And we have the activations from the hook.
So we can look at the sizes of those.
And we see that they are both the same size.
And they're both one by 17 by 768.
First dimension is always the batch dimension.
Uh, it turns out that there are 17 tokens in this text.
And of course this is the embedding dimension.
Now, these two are not the same thing, right?
This is the final outputs from this entire transformer block.
And this one is just the output of the MLP Subblock.
That is not everything that goes into the next layer.
This is just the adjustments to the residual stream that are calculated in the MLP layer.
Okay, so here what I'm doing is extracting two hidden states from the this layer.
This was layer ten and the next layer.
So I call this hidden state and hidden state next.
And now I'm also going to extract the attention delta.
So that adjustment to the embeddings vectors from this layer and also the MLP adjustments.
The second point that I wanted to mention about switching the model into eval mode or not, is that
if the model is not in eval mode, if it's in train mode, then that means that all of the regularization
techniques, including dropout, are still activated.
Therefore, if you are not switching the model into eval mode, then you would also want to include
the dropout when it is appropriate for whatever analysis you're running.
So if you really want to match all of the results of a forward pass, then you should also include The
dropout, uh, with the activations like this line.
Now, that said, as I have mentioned several times already.
In general, if you are not training the model, you should always switch it into eval mode.
But now you have some explanation of what else would need to be included if you want to keep it in train
mode.
This code here creates a little mask to just remove some outlier values.
That helps with the plotting.
I will actually discuss this more later.
Okay, so let me just run this.
And now the idea is that, uh, I can reconstruct the the next layer.
So layer N plus one or L plus one.
Using the output of the current layer plus the attention adjustment plus the MLP adjustment.
So this is like the theory of how language models work.
And if this theory is true then the left hand side should equal the right hand side.
And that's basically what we show over here in this plot.
This is what I showed in the slides.
Okay.
So here is the correlation between all the token embeddings for layer one and layer 11.
This comes from the hidden states.
So this is the output of layer ten.
And this is the output of layer 11.
They're pretty strongly correlated with each other because it's all the same tokens.
It's just getting passed through.
And inside this one transformer block.
We are calculating a little bit of an adjustment in the attention sub block, and then a little bit
of an adjustment in the MLP sub block, and those get added back together.
And then yeah giving us a slightly different set of token embeddings.
Okay.
Here we see the adjustments.
Yeah they are weakly correlated.
And then the main thing is to see this plot over here that when we add these layers the the output of
the layer from hidden states with the adjustments from the attention and MLP sub blocks, then we exactly
reconstruct correlation of one.
We exactly reconstruct the output of layer 11 based on the input into layer 11, which is the output
of layer ten.
Okay.
Uh, the last thing I want to show is basically just about this mask.
So it turns out that when I ran this, uh, this text through the model, there was a small number of
dimensions for a couple of tokens, probably the first token, although I didn't really look into it
that much where the we get some just extreme outlier values.
So like this.
Again, this is probably coming from the first token in this sequence.
But I just thought this makes the plot look kind of ugly and sort of hard to see.
So therefore I, you know, arbitrarily came up with this threshold where basically any value greater
than zero I remove.
That's purely for visual demonstration purposes.
This is not the sort of thing you would really need to worry about in a real analysis.
I hope you found this video useful.
You will continue using both hooks and hidden states throughout the rest of this course, and probably
anything else you do with analyses of Llms or other PyTorch models.